---
layout: post
title: Rustopals - Part 1
---

<!-- introduction-->
<!-- whats the purpose of this post -->

Having always been interested in information security, I was very excited when I learned about the Cryptopals challenge by Matasano security a few years ago. But as it happens with many things in life, I put it in my queue of projects and it never bubbled up again until now.

Fortunately, being a Ph.D. student has some advantages such as letting me pursue a lot of side projects. Considering that my weapon of choice at the moment is Rust, I decided it would be a good time to solve the Cryptopals challenges using Rust, both as a means of continue to learn Rust as well as finally diving into the mystical world of crypto-analysis.

<!-- Who is this series aimed to -->
This series makes the only assumption that you have a working Rust development environment and the desire to learn more about both Rust and Cryptoanalysis. So everyone is welcome!

<!-- how will the series be organized -->

At the moment of writing this post there are 64 challenges of varying complexity in the Matasano website. For each article in the series I'll group a few of them together and try to cover the most important aspects of each one.

Without further ado, lets get started with the challenges.

### [Challenge 1](https://cryptopals.com/sets/1/challenges/1): Convert hex to base64
> The string:
>
>49276d206b696c6c696e6720796f757220627261696e206c696b65206120706f69736f6e6f7573206d757368726f6f6d
>
>Should produce:
>
>SSdtIGtpbGxpbmcgeW91ciBicmFpbiBsaWtlIGEgcG9pc29ub3VzIG11c2hyb29t

This challenge is a warm up challenge with not much difficulty at all, however, it sets some of the basic work we will use through-out all other challenges. In fact, the website gives us a rule-of-thumb for all of the challenges:

>Always operate on raw bytes, never on encoded strings. Only use hex and base64 for pretty-printing.

The work required to solve this in Rust is to figure out how to encode and decode hex and base64 strings. A bit of fuddling 


### [Challenge 2](https://cryptopals.com/sets/1/challenges/2)

### [Challenge 3](https://cryptopals.com/sets/1/challenges/3)

### Coming up next in Rustopals...